English version of CBO documentation (#8783)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/concepts/optimizer.md

# Query Optimization in {{ ydb-short-name }}

{{ ydb-short-name }} uses two types of query optimizers: a rule-based optimizer and a cost-based optimizer. The cost-based optimizer is used for complex queries, usually analytical ([OLAP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Online_analytical_processing)), while rule-based optimization works on all queries.

A query plan is a graph of operations, such as reading data from a source, filtering a data stream by a predicate, or more complex operations such as [JOIN](../yql/reference/syntax/join.md) и [GROUP BY](../yql/reference/syntax/group_by.md). Optimizers in YDB take an initial query plan as input and transform it into a more efficient plan that is equivalent to the initial one in terms of the returned result.

## Rule-based Optimizer

> A significant part of the optimizations in YDB is applicable to almost any query plan, which eliminates the need to analyze alternative plans and their costs. The rule-based optimizer consists of a set of heuristic rules that are applied whenever possible. For example, it is useful to filter out data as early as possible in the execution plan for any query. Each optimizer rule comprises of a condition that triggers the rule and rewriting logic that is executed when the plan is applied. Rules are applied iteratively as long as any rule conditions match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A significant part of the optimizations in YDB is applicable to almost any query plan, which eliminates the need to analyze alternative plans and their costs. The rule-based optimizer consists of a set of heuristic rules that are applied whenever possible. For example, it is useful to filter out data as early as possible in the execution plan for any query. Each optimizer rule comprises a condition that triggers the rule and rewriting logic that is executed when the plan is applied. Rules are applied iteratively as long as any rule conditions match.
```

## Cost-Based Query Optimizer

Cost-Based Optimizer is used for more complex optimizations, such as choosing an optimal join order and join algorithms. Cost-based Optimizer considers a large number of alternative execution plans for each query and chooses the best one based on the cost estimate for each option. Currently, this optimizer only works with plans that contain [JOIN](../yql/reference/syntax/join.md) operations. It chooses the best order for these operations to be executed, and also chooses the most efficient implementation for each Join algoritm in the plan.

The cost optimizer consists of three main components:

* Plan enumerator
* Cost estimation function

> * Statistics module, which is used to estimate statistics for the cost function

Author: We have defined Cost Based Optimizer, so we don't need to use a determiner before, it sounds much better w/o one

### Plan enumerator

> The current Cost Based Optimizer in {{ ydb-short-name }} enumerates all useful join trees, for which the join conditions are defined. We first build a join hypergraph, where the nodes are tables and edges are join conditions. Depending on how the original query was written, the join hypergraph may have quite different topologies, varying from simple chain-like graphs to complex cliques. The resulting topology of the join graph determines how many possible alternite plans need to be considered by the optimizer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current Cost-Based Optimizer in {{ ydb-short-name }} enumerates all useful join trees, for which the join conditions are defined. We first build a join hypergraph, where the nodes are tables and edges are join conditions. Depending on how the original query was written, the join hypergraph may have quite different topologies, varying from simple chain-like graphs to complex cliques. The resulting topology of the join graph determines how many possible alternite plans need to be considered by the optimizer.
```

> ### Plan enumerator
> 
> The current Cost-Based Optimizer in {{ ydb-short-name }} enumerates all useful join trees, for which the join conditions are defined. We first build a join hypergraph, where the nodes are tables and edges are join conditions. Depending on how the original query was written, the join hypergraph may have quite different topologies, varying from simple chain-like graphs to complex cliques. The resulting topology of the join graph determines how many possible alternite plans need to be considered by the optimizer.
> 
> For example, a star is a common topology in analytical queries, where a main fact table is joined to multiple dimension tables:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Plan enumerator

The current cost-based optimizer in {{ ydb-short-name }} enumerates all useful join trees for which the join conditions are defined. First, it builds a join hypergraph, where the nodes represent tables and the edges represent join conditions. Depending on how the original query is written, the join hypergraph can exhibit various topologies, ranging from simple chain-like graphs to complex cliques. The resulting topology of the join graph determines how many potential alternative plans the optimizer must consider.

For example, a star is a common topology in analytical queries, where a main fact table is joined to multiple dimension tables:
```

Author: I don't see any reasoning why you think your version is better (except correcting capitalization and a typo)

```sql
SELECT
    P.Brand,
    S.Country AS Countries,
    SUM(F.Units_Sold)

FROM Fact_Sales F
INNER JOIN Dim_Date D    ON (F.Date_Id = D.Id)
INNER JOIN Dim_Store S   ON (F.Store_Id = S.Id)
INNER JOIN Dim_Product P ON (F.Product_Id = P.Id)

WHERE D.Year = 1997 AND  P.Product_Category = 'tv'

GROUP BY
    P.Brand,
    S.Country
```

> In this query graph, all `Dim...` tables are joined to the `Fact_Sales` fact table:
> ![Join Graph](_assets/Star-Schema.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this query graph, all `Dim...` tables are joined to the `Fact_Sales` fact table:

![Join graph](_assets/Star-Schema.png)
```

> Common topologies also include chain and clique. A "chain" is a topology where tables are connected to each other sequentially and each table participates in no more than one join. A "clique" is a fully connected graph where each table is connected to another.
> 
> In practice, OLAP queries often have a topology that is a combination of a "star" and a "chain", while complex topologies like a "clique" are very rare.
> 
> The topology greatly influences the number of alternative plans that the optimizer needs to consider. Therefore, the cost-based optimizer limits the number of joins that are compared by exhaustive search, depending on the topology of the original plan. The capabilities of exact optimization in {{ ydb-short-name }} are listed in the following table:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Common topologies also include chains and cliques. A "chain" is a topology where tables are connected sequentially, with each table participating in no more than one join. A "clique" is a fully connected graph where each table is connected to every other table.

In practice, OLAP queries often exhibit a combination of "star" and "chain" topologies, while complex topologies like a "clique" are very rare.

The topology significantly impacts the number of alternative plans the optimizer must consider. Therefore, the cost-based optimizer limits the number of joins that are evaluated through an exhaustive search, depending on the topology of the original plan. The capabilities of exact optimization in {{ ydb-short-name }} are listed in the following table:
```

Author: I don't agree to these changes - especially 'evaluated though an' - this is more confusing, it gives an impression that we are evaluating joins - which is not the case

| Topology | Number of supported joins |
| -------- | ------------------------- |
| Chain | 110 |
| Star | 18 |
| Clique | 15 |

> {{ ydb-short-name }} uses a modification of the [DPHyp](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/47862092_Dynamic_Programming_Strikes_Back) algorithm to search for the best join order. DPHyp is a modern dynamic programming algorithm for query optimization that avoids enumerating unnecessary alternatives and allows you to optimize plans with `JOIN` operators, complex predicates, and even `GROUP BY` and `ORDER BY` operators.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{ ydb-short-name }} uses a modification of the [DPHyp](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/47862092_Dynamic_Programming_Strikes_Back) algorithm to search for the optimal join order. DPHyp is a modern dynamic programming algorithm for query optimization that avoids enumerating unnecessary alternatives and enables the optimization of plans involving `JOIN` operators, complex predicates, and even `GROUP BY` and `ORDER BY` operators.
```

Author: Here the changes are worse than the original - replacing simpler terms with passive constructs like 'enables the optimization of' or 'involving'

> {{ ydb-short-name }} uses a modification of the [DPHyp](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/47862092_Dynamic_Programming_Strikes_Back) algorithm to search for the best join order. DPHyp is modern dynamic programming algorithm for query optimization that avoids enumerating unnecessary alternatives and allows you to optimize plans with `JOIN` operators, complex predicates, and even `GROUP BY` and `ORDER BY` operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{ ydb-short-name }} uses a modification of the [DPHyp](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/47862092_Dynamic_Programming_Strikes_Back) algorithm to search for the best join order. DPHyp is a modern dynamic programming algorithm for query optimization that avoids enumerating unnecessary alternatives and allows you to optimize plans with `JOIN` operators, complex predicates, and even `GROUP BY` and `ORDER BY` operators.
```

> ### Cost Estimation Function
> 
> In order to compare plans, we need to estimate their costs. Cost Function estimates the time and resources it takes to execute an operation in {{ ydb-short-name }}. The main parameters of the cost function are estimates of the input data size for each operator and the size of its result. These estimates are made based on statistics collected from {{ ydb-short-name }} tables, as well as an analysis of the plan itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Cost estimation function

To compare plans, the optimizer needs to estimate their costs. The cost function estimates the time and resources required to execute an operation in {{ ydb-short-name }}. The primary parameters of the cost function are estimates of the input data size for each operator and the size of its output. These estimates are based on statistics collected from {{ ydb-short-name }} tables, along with an analysis of the plan itself.
```

### Statistics for the Cost Based Optimizer {#statistics}

> Cost Based Optimizer uses tables statistics and individual column statistics. {{ ydb-short-name }} collects and maintains statistics in the background. You can force statistics collection using the [ANALYZE](../yql/reference/syntax/analyze.md) command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cost Based Optimizer uses table statistics and individual column statistics. {{ ydb-short-name }} collects and maintains statistics in the background. You can force statistics collection using the [ANALYZE](../yql/reference/syntax/analyze.md) command.
```

Current set of table statistics:

> * Number of records;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Number of records
```

* Table size in bytes

Current set of column statistics:

> * [Count-min sketch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Count%E2%80%93min_sketch).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Count-min sketch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Count%E2%80%93min_sketch)
```

> ### Statistics for the Cost Based Optimizer {#statistics}
> 
> Cost Based Optimizer uses table statistics and individual column statistics. {{ ydb-short-name }} collects and maintains statistics in the background. You can force statistics collection using the [ANALYZE](../yql/reference/syntax/analyze.md) command.
> 
> Current set of table statistics:
> 
> * Number of records
> * Table size in bytes
> 
> Current set of column statistics:
> 
> * [Count-min sketch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Count%E2%80%93min_sketch)
> 
> Current cost optimization levels
> 
> In {{ ydb-short-name }}, you can set the cost optimization level via pragma [CostBasedOptimizationLevel](../yql/reference/syntax/pragma.md#costbasedoptimizationlevel).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Statistics for the cost-based optimizer {#statistics}

The cost-based optimizer relies on table statistics and individual column statistics. {{ ydb-short-name }} collects and maintains these statistics in the background. You can manually force statistics collection using the [ANALYZE](../yql/reference/syntax/analyze.md) query.

The current set of table statistics includes:

* Number of records
* Table size in bytes

The current set of column statistics includes:

* [Count-min sketch](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Count%E2%80%93min_sketch)

### Cost optimization levels

In {{ ydb-short-name }}, you can configure the cost optimization level via the [CostBasedOptimizationLevel](../yql/reference/syntax/pragma.md#costbasedoptimizationlevel) pragma.
```
